03_Alignment.md, before:

# Edinburgh Genomics - MinION Bioinformatics
## Read alignment

## Aligning reads to a reference

We can either use BWA or LAST.  In our experience BWA tends to be fast but less sensitive, and LAST tends to be slow but more sensitive.

BWA straight to sorted BAM:

```sh
# bwa index genome
bwa index Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa

# create fasta index for samtools
samtools faidx Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa

# run bwa and pipe straight to samtools to create BAM
bwa mem -x ont2d Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa MAP006-1.2D.fastq | \
        samtools view -T Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa -bS - | \
        samtools sort -T 2D_vs_MG1655.bwa -o 2D_vs_MG1655.bwa.bam -

# index bam
samtools index 2D_vs_MG1655.bwa.bam
```

LAST straight to sorted BAM:

```sh
# first create the fasta file
porefq2fa MAP006-1.2D.fastq > MAP006-1.2D.fasta

# create a LAST db of the reference genome
lastdb MG1655 Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa

# align high quaklity reads to reference genome with LAST
lastal -q 1 -a 1 -b 1 MG1655 MAP006-1.2D.fasta > MAP006-1.2D.maf

# convert the MAF to BAM with complete CIGAR (matches and mismatches)
maf-convert.py sam MAP006-1.2D.maf | \
    samtools view -T Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa -bS - | \
    samtools sort -T 2D_vs_MG1655.last -o 2D_vs_MG1655.last.bam -

# index bam
samtools index 2D_vs_MG1655.last.bam
```

# Assessing the accuracy of alignment
Aaron Quinlan has written a few useful scripts to work with nanopore data available on [github](https://github.com/arq5x/nanopore-scripts/).  We can use these to generate some statistics on the quality of alignments.  Unfortunately, at present the indel counting only works with LAST not BWA, due to differences in the cigar strings:

```bash
# count errors
count-errors.py 2D_vs_MG1655.last.bam > 2D_vs_MG1655.last.profile.txt

# take a look
head 2D_vs_MG1655.last.profile.txt
```

We can visualise these in R:

```bash
R
```
```R
prof <- read.table("2D_vs_MG1655.last.profile.txt", header=TRUE, sep="\t", stringsAsFactors=FALSE)

# plot alignment length against read length
plot(prof$read_len, prof$align_len, xlab="Read Length", ylab="Aln length", pch=16)

# find the maximum aligned length
max(prof$align_len)
prof[ prof$align_len == max(prof$align_len) , ]
```

In their [Gigascience paper](http://www.gigasciencejournal.com/content/3/1/22), Quick et al defined:

 Read percentage identity is defined as 100 * matches/(matches + deletions + insertions + mismatches)

We can calculate this in R:

```R
pid <- 100 * prof$matches / (prof$matches + prof$deletions + prof$insertions + prof$mismatches)

# show a boxplot
boxplot(pid, ylab="% ID", col="skyblue2", xlab="2D")
```

# Aligning events with Nanopolish EventAlign

Nanopolish was written by Jared Simpson and represents a suite of tools for aligning events to a reference sequence and working with those (using HMMs) to improve e.g. SNP calling and consensus accuracy

Nanopolish eventalign aligns the raw squiggle data directly to a reference genome, but requires a sequence-based alignment to guide it.

**If you run the command below it can take up to ~1hr on the VM we're working on, so I recommend you don't**

```bash
nanopolish eventalign --print-read-names --scale-events --reads MAP006-1.2D.fasta \
                      -b 2D_vs_MG1655.bwa.bam -g Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa \
                      > Data/eventalign/MAP006-1.2D.eventalign.txt

# eventalign can also output SAM format with the --sam flag
```

We have a smaller dataset pre-run in Data/eventalign/singleread.eventalign.txt so let's take a look at that:

```bash
head Data/eventalign/singleread.eventalign.txt
```

Now we can visualise in R

```bash
R
```
```R
# read in eventalign output as a data.frame
d <- read.table("Data/eventalign/singleread.eventalign.txt", header=TRUE, sep="\t")

# let's just look at the template strand
dt <- d[d$strand=="t",]

# plot.as.squiggle is a utility function in R that takes a vector of
# numbers and plots them as if they were an event-driven nanopore
# squiggle.  We need this because in real nanopore data, the events
# are differing times apart, so can be hard to visualise, whereas
# plot.as.squiggle simply uses the same false time interval

# get data for the first 100 event means
em <- plot.as.squiggle(dt$event_level_mean[1:100], plot=FALSE)

# get data for the first 100 model means they are aligned to
mm <- plot.as.squiggle(dt$model_mean[1:100], plot=FALSE)

# plot and visualise
plot(em$times, em$means, type="l", ylab="mean signal", xlab="fake time")
lines(mm$times, mm$means, col="red")
```

Commit message:

Missing library(poRe) call in R example

03_Alignment.md, after:

# Edinburgh Genomics - MinION Bioinformatics
## Read alignment

## Aligning reads to a reference

We can either use BWA or LAST.  In our experience BWA tends to be fast but less sensitive, and LAST tends to be slow but more sensitive.

BWA straight to sorted BAM:

```sh
# bwa index genome
bwa index Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa

# create fasta index for samtools
samtools faidx Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa

# run bwa and pipe straight to samtools to create BAM
bwa mem -x ont2d Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa MAP006-1.2D.fastq | \
        samtools view -T Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa -bS - | \
        samtools sort -T 2D_vs_MG1655.bwa -o 2D_vs_MG1655.bwa.bam -

# index bam
samtools index 2D_vs_MG1655.bwa.bam
```

LAST straight to sorted BAM:

```sh
# first create the fasta file
porefq2fa MAP006-1.2D.fastq > MAP006-1.2D.fasta

# create a LAST db of the reference genome
lastdb MG1655 Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa

# align high quaklity reads to reference genome with LAST
lastal -q 1 -a 1 -b 1 MG1655 MAP006-1.2D.fasta > MAP006-1.2D.maf

# convert the MAF to BAM with complete CIGAR (matches and mismatches)
maf-convert.py sam MAP006-1.2D.maf | \
    samtools view -T Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa -bS - | \
    samtools sort -T 2D_vs_MG1655.last -o 2D_vs_MG1655.last.bam -

# index bam
samtools index 2D_vs_MG1655.last.bam
```

# Assessing the accuracy of alignment
Aaron Quinlan has written a few useful scripts to work with nanopore data available on [github](https://github.com/arq5x/nanopore-scripts/).  We can use these to generate some statistics on the quality of alignments.  Unfortunately, at present the indel counting only works with LAST not BWA, due to differences in the cigar strings:

```bash
# count errors
count-errors.py 2D_vs_MG1655.last.bam > 2D_vs_MG1655.last.profile.txt

# take a look
head 2D_vs_MG1655.last.profile.txt
```

We can visualise these in R:

```bash
R
```
```R
prof <- read.table("2D_vs_MG1655.last.profile.txt", header=TRUE, sep="\t", stringsAsFactors=FALSE)

# plot alignment length against read length
plot(prof$read_len, prof$align_len, xlab="Read Length", ylab="Aln length", pch=16)

# find the maximum aligned length
max(prof$align_len)
prof[ prof$align_len == max(prof$align_len) , ]
```

In their [Gigascience paper](http://www.gigasciencejournal.com/content/3/1/22), Quick et al defined:

 Read percentage identity is defined as 100 * matches/(matches + deletions + insertions + mismatches)

We can calculate this in R:

```R
pid <- 100 * prof$matches / (prof$matches + prof$deletions + prof$insertions + prof$mismatches)

# show a boxplot
boxplot(pid, ylab="% ID", col="skyblue2", xlab="2D")
```

# Aligning events with Nanopolish EventAlign

Nanopolish was written by Jared Simpson and represents a suite of tools for aligning events to a reference sequence and working with those (using HMMs) to improve e.g. SNP calling and consensus accuracy

Nanopolish eventalign aligns the raw squiggle data directly to a reference genome, but requires a sequence-based alignment to guide it.

**If you run the command below it can take up to ~1hr on the VM we're working on, so I recommend you don't**

```bash
nanopolish eventalign --print-read-names --scale-events --reads MAP006-1.2D.fasta \
                      -b 2D_vs_MG1655.bwa.bam -g Data/reference/Ecoli_MG1655/MG1655.fa \
                      > Data/eventalign/MAP006-1.2D.eventalign.txt

# eventalign can also output SAM format with the --sam flag
```

We have a smaller dataset pre-run in Data/eventalign/singleread.eventalign.txt so let's take a look at that:

```bash
head Data/eventalign/singleread.eventalign.txt
```

Now we can visualise in R

```bash
R
```
```R
# Load the poRe library for the plot.as.squiggle function...
library(poRe)

# read in eventalign output as a data.frame
d <- read.table("Data/eventalign/singleread.eventalign.txt", header=TRUE, sep="\t")

# let's just look at the template strand
dt <- d[d$strand=="t",]

# plot.as.squiggle is a utility function in R that takes a vector of
# numbers and plots them as if they were an event-driven nanopore
# squiggle.  We need this because in real nanopore data, the events
# are differing times apart, so can be hard to visualise, whereas
# plot.as.squiggle simply uses the same false time interval

# get data for the first 100 event means
em <- plot.as.squiggle(dt$event_level_mean[1:100], plot=FALSE)

# get data for the first 100 model means they are aligned to
mm <- plot.as.squiggle(dt$model_mean[1:100], plot=FALSE)

# plot and visualise
plot(em$times, em$means, type="l", ylab="mean signal", xlab="fake time")
lines(mm$times, mm$means, col="red")
```
